{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.21.2512;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\sl240\slmult1\lang9\f0\fs36     \ul Ethics\ulnone :  The philosophical study of morality (right/wrong, good/bad, virtue/vice, ...)             \par
                         - anything to do with evaluating behavior (incl. self-interest, means-end reasoning)                                                                                                                         \par
                         - anything to do with practical 'oughts'                                                                                                                        \par
\par
   "Is morality objective?", the big question of ethical objectivity                \par
        - often filed under 'Metaethics'           \par
\par
      One meaning: "Are there any exceptionless moral rules?"                 \par
        - It seems like even important moral rules might have some occasional exceptions.          \par
        - However, there are philosophers who defend \i absolute moral rules\i0 .          \par
        - There are also plenty of philosophers who think that there are ethical principles (perhaps           \par
           complicated ethical principles) that are exceptionlessly correct (e.g. utilitarianism).        \par
                   \par
      Another meaning: "Are there any moral truths that are \i objectively \i0 true? i.e. no matter what             \par
                                             anyone thinks"                                                                                                     \par
           - This might be true of general moral principles, or it might just be true of particular cases.        \par
\par
     Does God matter to ethical objectivity?              \par
          \ul Motivation\ulnone : Afterlife rewards/punishments motivate people to behave themselves.         \par
             But then again there are other motivations for doing what's right, and a lot of them sound      \par
             more admirable than mere self-interest.      \par
                   - Emotions: love, guilt, compassion, concern for society at large\par
                   - Rational motivation: doing what is right \i because it is right \i0 (Kant)\par
\fs12                                                                               \par
\fs36            \ul Rationality\ulnone : Again, afterlife reward/punishments give people \i a good reason \i0 to behave                              \par
           themselves.       \par
                 And emotions might sound like irrational feelings we should get over in order to have as   \par
                 good a life as possible (if God doesn't exist).  \par
                      - This is assuming that self-interest is exceptionally rational.                                                                                                                            \par
                      - It's assuming that emotions are not at all rational.                                                                                                                            \par
                      - It's also assuming that there can't be any rationality in morality in and of itself (Kant)                                                                                                                            \par
                      - It's also assuming that there's no non-religious harmony between self-interest and                                                                                                                             \par
                         morality (perhaps non-psychopaths have a happier and more rewarding life than                                                                                                                         \par
                         psychopaths).                                                                                                                         \par
\fs12                                   \par
\fs36             \ul Knowledge\ulnone : Without God, how can we have \i knowledge \i0 of right and wrong?      \par
                   - Even if you \i don't\i0  believe in God, God might still exist, and he might have given all humans\par
                      a conscience with the moral law written in it.                                                                                                                            \par
                   - Even if you \i do \i0 believe in God, it might not be all that clear how to gain knowledge of                                                                                                                              \par
                     his will or the moral law.                                                                                                                             \par
                            - It's not all that clear which religion, which Scriptures, to turn to, not to mention                                                                                                                      \par
                               which translation, which collection of books in particular. And even when that is                                                                                                                   \par
                               settled, there's still a good deal of apparent uncertainty in the moral teachings of                                                                                                                   \par
                               any religious Scripture.                                                                                                                   \par
                            - Some parts of Scripture look morally troubling, and if the only way to tell which                                                                                                                      \par
                               parts to accept is to use your pre-existing moral knowledge, then we're not getting                                                                                                                   \par
                               our moral knowledge from Scripture after all.                                                                                                                   \par
                     - What if God's will conflicts with your own moral judgment? (What if it's an evil                                                                                                                             \par
                        command?)                                                                                                                          \par
                            - Abraham and Isaac: Should you say No, because it must be some sort of mistake                                                                                                                      \par
                              (Kant)? Or should you say Yes, while absurdly trusting you won't have to do it                                                                                                                     \par
                              (Kierkegaard)?                                                                                                                    \par
                   \par
               \ul Objectivity\ulnone :  God's existence is perhaps necessary for sustaining the view that morality is                     \par
                                        objective.                                                                                                          \par
                   \par
                     - \ul The Euthyphro dilemma\ulnone :                                                                                                                              \par
                            Does God love the pious because it is pious, or is it pious because God loves it?                                                                                                                      \par
                            Does God will what is morally right because it is morally right, or is it morally right                                                                                                                      \par
                            because God wills it?                                                                                                                      \par
                   \par
                            \ul First horn of the dilemma                                        Second horn of the dilemma                                                                                                                      \par
\ulnone                             There is already an objective moral                    God's will is where all moral standards                                                                                                  \par
                            standard in place prior to God's will.                  come from.                                                                                                   \par
                              - \i Independent moral standard\i0                                 - \i Divine command theory\i0                                                                                     \par
                   \par
                                       demote God's will to                                         make morality/God \i arbitrary\i0                                                                   \par
                                       a lower position                                                  anything goes / contingency                                                         \par
                                                                                                                         circularity (authority, goodness)                         \par
                                      power, freedom, atheism                                                                                                            \par
                   \par
     Moral objectivity without God:  non-naturalism, naturalism, constructivism, quasi-realism            \par
          (positions in metaethics)         \par
\par
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------\par
                   \par
     Moral relativism:  (i) a view that rejects moral objectivity, (ii) puts a lot of emphasis on cultural             \par
                                        norms that vary from place to place and time to time, and (iii) often emphasizes                                                                                                          \par
                                        \i tolerance \i0 of people holding different moral views                                                                                                         \par
                   \par
         One common version:  An action is right \i if and only if (and because)\i0  that action is approved of          \par
                                                      by the \i agent\i0 's culture.  (likewise for wrong/disapproved, etc.)                                                                                          \par
                   \par
        [Another common version: An action is right \i if and only if (and because)\i0  that action is approved of          \par
                                                             by the \i evaluator\i0 's culture.  (likewise for wrong/disapproved, etc.)]                                                                                          \par
                 \par
      Simple argument for moral relativism:             \par
          1.  Moral views vary from culture to culture; there is widespread moral disagreement.         \par
          2.  If there is widespread disagreement in some domain, then there is no objective standard         \par
                (no objective truths) in that domain. \par
          3.  Therefore, there is no objective moral standard (truths) that holds for all cultures.       \par
                   \par
         -  Against 1, some might object that this disagreement is merely superficial disagreement          \par
            based on factual disagreements. If all the facts could be cleared up, then people would        \par
            share the same moral views, because deep down we all have (pretty much) the same values.        \par
                  - \ul Reply\ulnone : But sometimes there are disagreements that do not seem to be merely a matter\par
                     of factual disagreement. Some disagreements seem to be \i fundamentally \i0 moral.                                                                                                                             \par
                     (e.g., death penalty is pure justice vs. death penalty is flat-out murder)                                                                                                                             \par
       -  Against 2, it looks like there are a lot of objective domains filled with objective truths where          \par
           there is nevertheless widespread disagreement (e.g., science, history).        \par
                    - Maybe it matters that in certain domains we have standard methods we can use                                                                                                                              \par
                       to eventually figure out the correct answer, but in morality it's not clear that we do.                                                                                                                           \par
        -  About 3, it seems to fall a good deal short of genuine \i moral relativism\i0 .           \par
                   \par
      Objections to moral relativism:             \par
        - Anything goes:  No matter how horrifying a practice might seem, if there's a culture that          \par
                                          approves of it, then there's nothing wrong with them practicing it.                                                                                                        \par
        - No moral progress:  As a culture changes its practices over time, we cannot say that those           \par
                                                  practices are getting morally better. We can only say that they're changing.                                                                                                \par
        - Indeterminacy about 'culture':  Any given individual might well belong to several different           \par
                                                                        cultures, each with its own cultural norms, and those norms                                                                          \par
                                                                        might conflict with each other. In which case there seems to be                                                                          \par
                                                                        no answer as to what's morally right or wrong for that indiv'l.                                                                          \par
                   \par
      Another argument for (something like) moral relativism:             \par
          1.  Due to human nature, we are so heavily influenced by the norms of our culture that we         \par
                are (nearly?) \i unable \i0 to think/evaluate in any other terms or behave in any other way. \par
          2.  In order for someone to be morally \i obligated \i0 to do something (they \i ought \i0 to do X),          \par
                they must have the \i ability \i0 to do that something (they \i can \i0 do X).   \par
                      [the principle of 'ought implies can'; inability is a perfect excuse]                                                                                                                            \par
          3.  Therefore, we are (nearly?) never morally obligated to think/evaluate/behave differently         \par
                from the way our culture has instilled in us.   \par
                   \par
        - Against 1, maybe it's possible for human beings to defy their culture and think/e/b differently.           \par
          People leave cults they were raised in. Some people leave society altogether (hermits, ascetic        \par
          wanderers) and think in very different terms. On the opposite moral end of things, some        \par
          people dedicate themselves to violent twisted ways of life that their society abhors (serial         \par
          killers).         \par
               \ul Worry\ulnone :  Maybe only a small minority of people are capable of this.    \par
               \ul But\ulnone :  Some philosophers argue that any rational human being has the capacity to figure   \par
               out what's right and make themselves do the right thing, even if all their bad habits and   \par
               bad upbringing make it difficult to do so.    \par
                       \ul For example\ulnone :  Kant holds that, because we always \i ought \i0 to do the right thing (despite                                                                                                                         \par
                       any strong inclinations to the contrary), that means we always \i can\i0  do the right thing                                                                                                                          \par
                       (again, despite any strong inclinations to the contrary). This is only possible because                                                                                                                           \par
                       we have a very high-powered free will.                                                                                                                           \par
                   \par
          - Against 2, maybe people ought to do the right thing \i even if\i0  their cultural upbringing has made         \par
            them completely \i unable \i0 to do it. Maybe the fact that they can't think in any other terms just       \par
            shows how morally corrupt they are. Maybe morality just isn't fair, it doesn't matter what      \par
            you're able or unable to do, it doesn't matter whether you freely chose to be a certain way       \par
            or to see things a certain way. All that matters is the way you are.       \par
\par
\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par
}
 