{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.21.2512;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\sl240\slmult1\lang9\f0\fs36    Mind-Body Problem                  \par
       - \ul Dualism\ulnone :  The mind (or at least some mental phenomena) cannot be fully understood in                                                                                     \par
         physical terms; it is non-physical (although of course it has some sort of close relationship with             \par
         the brain).                                                                                                               \par
      - \ul Materialism\ulnone  (aka Physicalism; materialist monism): The mind (all mental phenomena) \i can\i0             \par
         be fully understood in physical terms, just like everything else in the natural world.          \par
\par
   Arguments against materialism:                \par
        Divisibility argument:           \par
            1. Physical systems like brains are complicated arrangements of simpler parts (i.e. divisible)       \par
            2. No individual mind is a complicated arrangement of simpler parts (i.e. a mind is simple, \i one\i0 )      \par
            3. Therefore, no individual mind is a brain-like physical system.       \par
        Reasons for accepting 2:               \par
             - "Unity of consciousness"? But what about split-brain experiments?       \par
             - Spatial predicates don't apply? But who knows, maybe they do, it's hard to say.       \par
             - The mind's grasping of eternal truths suggests that it's something that cannot fall apart?                                                                                                                 \par
                But this depends on a pretty robust theory of eternal truths that not many materialists will                                                \par
                accept.   \par
\par
    Follow-up argument:                \par
            1'. Physical systems like brains are complicated arrangements of \ul\b\i mindless\ulnone\b0\i0  parts.       \par
            2'. No \ul\b\i mind\ulnone\b0\i0  can be a complicated arrangement of \ul\b\i mindless\ulnone\b0\i0  parts.       \par
            3'. Therefore, no mind is a brain-like physical system.       \par
                   \par
           Should we accept premise 1'?               \par
               Common sense tells us that an individual nerve cell does not have anything mental going on.                                                                                                                   \par
               Or at least the tiny biochemical parts of an individual nerve cell have nothing mental going on. \par
                   \par
               \b Panpsychism\b0  is the view that rejects premise 1', and says that everything in nature has  \par
               something mental going on. This view sure seems to run contrary to common sense. But   \par
               at least it starts to make sense of how a brain could do mental stuff on its own.    \par
                   \par
           Should we accept premise 2'?        \par
                Maybe it is possible for a complicated whole to perform operations that its parts cannot.   \par
                 Look at bodily organs and the operations they perform.  \par
                 Look at computers and the operations they perform: e.g., information storage.  \par
                 \b Functionalism\b0  is the view that tries to understand the mind as a complicated system of                                                                                \par
                 cause and effect, a system made up of parts that do their own little bit of cause-and-effect.                                                                                                                 \par
                         - This is an abstract system that can be implemented in different kinds of material.                                                                                                                         \par
                         - Analogy: the same software can be run on different hardware                                                                                                                         \par
                         - Presumably a mechanical/metallic perfectly working replica of a human brain /                                                                                                                          \par
                            nervous system would have the very same mental activity going on.                                                                                                                      \par
                                   - Objection to functionalism: doesn't this mean you could implement a mind                                                                                                               \par
                                     just by getting a whole lot of people to cooperate (via two-way radios, symbols)                                                                                                             \par
                                      in the right way (Ned Block's example)? or you walk into a giant windmill-like                                                                                                             \par
                                      mind implementation (Leibniz's example)                                                                                                            \par
                   \par
   Conceivability argument:                \par
        1. \ul It is possible for a mind to exist without anything physical\ulnone , and \ul it is possible for any physical\ulnone            \par
             \ul system to exist without anything mental\ulnone .      \par
        2. If \i x\i0  and \i y\i0  can exist without each other, then \i x\i0  and \i y\i0  are not the same thing.           \par
        3. Therefore, minds and physical systems are not the same thing.           \par
                   \par
       The claim that, even if you understand everything about the workings of a physical system,            \par
        it still doesn't settle the question of whether it has a mind (esp. conscious experience); this claim           \par
        is often called the \b explanatory gap\b0 . And if this explanatory gap is real, then that seems to support           \par
        premise 1: a \b metaphysical gap\b0 .            \par
                  \par
       'doctrine of the bete-machine', the 'problem of other minds'            \par
                   \par
       Thomas Nagel, "What is it Like to Be a Bat?": it looks like scientific investigation into the physical           \par
        workings of bat perception won't tell us much about what it's actually like to be a bat: the            \par
        subjective side of things. And even though sometimes scientific progress shows that two things           \par
        that seem different at first are actually the same thing ultimately, the way this typically works is           \par
        by ignoring the subjective and focusing on what can be objectively investigated.  But obviously         \par
        it's no good to investigate something subjective by ignoring the subjective.           \par
                  \par
        Frank Jackson, "What Mary Didn't Know": even though she knew all the physical information          \par
         about color perception in humans, there was something she didn't know until she left the room,          \par
         a new piece of information: namely, what color looks like. This new piece of information is not          \par
        physical information, because she already knew all that. So conscious experience of what color          \par
        looks like is not physical.           \par
                   \par
        "Zombies" (mainly David Chalmers): it seems possible (at least remotely possible) to have physical          \par
        duplicates of human beings, walking around and talking and so on, with no conscious experience           \par
        whatsoever (nothing 'mental' in the experiential sense of mental). This is unlike pretty much           \par
         everything else\emdash e.g., digestion, life\emdash where once you get the physical system, the high-level          \par
         operation comes for free, no mystery, no extra question to be asked.          \par
                   \par
        \ul Objection\ulnone : Just because it \i seems \i0 possible for \i x\i0  and \i y\i0  to exist on their own, separately, that                                                                                    \par
        doesn't necessarily mean that it \i really \i0 is possible. It might just be a product of our incomplete          \par
        understanding of \i x\i0  and/or \i y\i0 .           \par
                - Ex: Arnauld on right triangles and Pyth. thm.   \par
                - Ex: water and H2O, even though it they might seem different from each other (to an                                                                                             \par
                  uninformed person, or in a hypothetical XYZ scenario), really they are absolutely                                                                                                                              \par
                  necessarily identical.                                                                                                                              \par
                   \par
        \ul Reply\ulnone :  Conscious experience is different. After all, even though it makes sense to have something           \par
        that looks like water, tastes like water, behaves like water, etc. but isn't really water; it doesn't           \par
        really make sense to have something that feels like pain, seems like pain, hurts like pain, etc. but           \par
        isn't really pain. Pain is a \i feeling\i0  \emdash  the way it feels is the way it really is. You can't find an ap-        \par
        pearance/reality gap in something that is \i appearance \i0 by definition.          \par
\par
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------\par
\par
    \ul Dualism and the problem of mental causation               \fs96\par
\ulnone                    \fs36\par
        Descartes is not only a dualist (a substance dualist who holds that there are two distinct kinds of           \par
         things: minds and bodies), he is also an \i interactionist\i0  dualist: he agrees with common sense          \par
         that physical events can/do cause mental events, and mental events can/do cause physical          \par
         events.          \par
\fs8                                                                                           \par
\fs36                  -  The problem of interactionism: how can physical events manage to have a causal impact   \par
                     on a non-physical mind, and vice versa? Even bringing in the pineal gland doesn't really                                                                                                                            \par
                     help.                                                                                                                              \par
\fs8                                                                                           \par
\fs36                  -  Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia: it would make more sense to allow the soul to have some  \par
                     sort of physicality to it, than to say that non-physical and physical things interact.                                                                                                                             \par
                   \par
          \ul Malebranche's 'occasionalism'\ulnone : Nothing in nature has any causal power at all, all real causal          \par
          activity is due to God. So my mind has no effect on my body, and my body has no effect on my         \par
          mind. God simply causes events in my mind and my body according to general laws and         \par
          patterns.         \par
                   \par
          \ul Spinoza's 'dual aspect theory' / 'parallelism'\ulnone : The entire universe can be understood in          \par
          physical terms or in mental terms, and either way is a perfectly good and complete way of          \par
          understanding the universe. So the causal processes in the mind and in the body are really         \par
          the same process understood in two different ways\emdash both according to strict laws of nature.         \par
                   \par
          \ul Leibniz's 'pre-established harmony'\ulnone : Every thing in nature has completely independent causal         \par
          power built into it by God at the very start. Nothing interacts with anything else in nature, only         \par
          having an impact on itself, even though it sure looks like things are interacting because of the         \par
          wise setting-up God has done.         \par
                   \par
          [\ul Conway's monism of degree\ulnone :  There's no such thing as matter (not as Descartes understood it).        \par
          Everything has some degree of life/spirituality in it (look at stuff under a microscope). So it         \par
          makes sense that things of a high degree can interact with things of a slightly lower degree of       \par
           life/spirituality, and so on, all the way down to the least alive matter there is.]        \par
                   \par
          [\ul Hume's skepticism about causation\ulnone : All we can observe in nature is events happening accor-         \par
           ding to \i regular patterns\i0 . When we see A always followed by B, and whenever A is absent, B        \par
           B is also absent, we say that A causes B. But we never observe the one event \i making\i0  the other       \par
           event happen. We never observe any \i causal force\i0 , or \i causal necessity\i0 . When we say that A       \par
           \i makes\i0  B happen, we have no clear understanding of what this means, all we're doing is        \par
           projecting a strong internal feeling of anticipation onto the external objects.]        \par
                   \par
          \ul Huxley's 'epiphenomenalism'\ulnone :  Animal behavior and indeed human behavior can be explained       \par
          in purely physical/mechanical terms, without even mentioning the mind (thoughts, feelings)         \par
          at all. But it's not that humans and animals don't have a mind. We do have a mind, but it has        \par
          no effect on the physical world. For scientific purposes (when it comes to cause and effect), it                                                                                                                              \par
          might as well not even exist.         \par
\fs8                                                                                           \par
                                                                                          \par
\fs36                   - Huxley seems to be assuming that physics is 'causally complete': i.e., it will never \par
                     encounter a physical event that is physically inexplicable. Physicists will never have to                                                                                                                             \par
                     say, "We have no idea where this physical event came from (no idea what caused it)!"                                                                                                                             \par
\fs8                                                                                           \par
                                                                                          \par
\fs36                  - Just like agent-causation theorists might have to place a risky bet on the future of science \par
                    (on the incompleteness of physics), interactionist dualists will also have to place that                                                                                                                              \par
                    risky bet. Whereas epiphenomenalists can relax, and take it easy, because their view                                                                                                                              \par
                    is totally compatible with the causal completeness of physics.                                                                                                                              \par
                   \par
                   \par
          \ul Do physicalists have a problem with mental causation?\ulnone          \par
\fs8                                                                                           \par
                                                                                          \par
\fs36           If the mind is an entirely physical phenomenon, then it seems there's no problem! When         \par
          a mental event has a physical effect, that's not mysterious, because the mental event is itself         \par
          physical. And this doesn't run against the causal completeness of physics, because (again)        \par
          the mental event is itself a physical event. Everything is physical (even the mental stuff), so          \par
          no problem, right?         \par
                - In general, physicalists seem to be happy about mental causation, and like to use it to         \par
                   give dualists a hard time.\par
                   \par
          Remember that many (most?) physicalists are functionalists. To explain how a whole bunch of         \par
          little mindless physical parts can make up a mind if they're organized together in the right way,         \par
          functionalists say that the mind is just an abstract system of cause and effect that happens to         \par
          be realized by the brain in animals like us. Presumably a machine could also have a mind if        \par
          it were complicated enough, and organized in just the right way.          \par
\fs8                                                                                  \par
                                                                                 \par
\fs36                   - According to functionalism, minds and mental states are 'multiply realizable'. For example,  \par
                     the mental state \i pain\i0  might be realized by C-fibers firing in the human brain, but realized                                                                                                                             \par
                     by some other physical state in an octopus, and realized by some third physical state in                                                                                                                              \par
                     an artificially intelligent machine, and realized by some fourth physical state in an extra-                                                                                                                             \par
                     terrestrial organism, etc.                                                                                                                             \par
\fs8                                                                                  \par
                                                                                 \par
\fs36                   - Because of multiple realizability, functionalists do have to make some sort of distinction\par
                    between the mental state and the specific physical state that happens to be realizing it                                                                                                                              \par
                    in a given case. And so it looks like the physical state is what does the causal work (i.e.                                                                                                                             \par
                    what actually causes physical effects). And so it looks like the mental state isn't doing\par
                    anything causally (at least not strictly speaking). Epiphenomenalism all over again!                                                                                                                              \par
                   \par
           Because functionalists seem to be faced with the same old problem of mental causation          \par
           (the threat of epiphenomenalism), a lot of physicalists opt for \b\i identity-theory\b0\i0 . Instead of         \par
           saying e.g. that pain is \i realized \i0 by C-fibers firing in humans, but could be realized by other         \par
           physical states in other lifeforms, identity-theorists say that pain \i is\i0  C-fibers firing. The mental       \par
           state and the physical state are flat-out \i identical\i0 . So then it makes perfect sense to say that       \par
           the mental state has effects in the physical world.       \par
\fs8                                                                                  \par
                                                                                 \par
\fs36                     - The problem of \b\i chauvinism\b0\i0 . Identity-theorists have to say that if you don't have C-fibers                                                                                                                              \par
                       (for example) then you can't feel pain. Wildly different lifeforms may have minds, but                                                                                                                           \par
                       their mental states are not our mental states, not at all. It's impossible to have our                                                                                                                           \par
                       mental states without having our physical make-up (fibers, tissues, neurons, carbon).                                                                                                                           \par
                   \par
          'substance dualism' vs. 'property dualism'         \par
             Descartes                           esp. among epiphenomenalists like Huxley                                                                                                          \par
             two distinct kinds           only physical things with physical properties                                                                                                                          \par
             of things                                 but also non-physical properties                                                                                                                       \par
                                                                          \par
\par
\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par
}
 