{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}}
{\colortbl ;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.21.2512;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\sl240\slmult1\lang9\ul\f0\fs36 Textbook\par
Omnilert > Groups > Subscribe to PHIL 331\par
Coursework Forum\ulnone : another one tonight\par
\ul Reading difficult? a lot?\par
\ulnone\par
1. Does Descartes think the mind and body are \ul distinct\ulnone  from each other, or are they \par
     fundamentally the same thing?\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
2. Does Descartes think the mind and body have nothing to do with each other, or do they \par
     \ul interact with each other as part of a mind-body union\ulnone ?\par
\cf1\fs8 ..\cf0\fs36\par
3. Does Descartes think that mental phenomena are special non-physical properties of the \par
     brain, or does he think that \ul the mind can exist on its own\ulnone ?\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
4. Does Descartes think his views on mind-body relations can be \ul demonstratively proven\ulnone , or  \par
     does he think that they are only the most probable explanation of what's going on?\par
\par
For the divisibility argument to work, it must be true that the mind is something unitary /\par
simple / partless / it has "unity of consciousness".\par
   -  Split-brain experiments might show us that what we often think of a unitary mind is\par
       in fact a complicated collection of mental modules working together at different tasks.\par
\par
Why was the argument from doubt in trouble?\par
  - Because of the "masked man fallacy". Or, if you like, the fact that Leibniz's Law doesn't work\par
     in contexts of knowledge, doubt, etc.\par
  - Examples: Superman = Clark Kent, water = H2O\par
  - Maybe the mind and the body are the same thing, just represented in two different ways.\par
\par
That's where the conceivability argument comes in.\par
\par
Descartes (1596-1650)\par
\par
\i Objections and Replies\i0 :\par
 - Johannes Caterus (1590-1655)\par
 - Marin Mersenne (1588\endash 1648)\par
 - Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679)\par
\ul  - Antoine Arnauld (1612-1694)\par
\ulnone  - Pierre Gassendi (1592-1655)\par
\par
\i Correspondence\i0 :\par
\ul  - Elisabeth of Bohemia (1618-1680)\ulnone\par
\par
\par
For a real distinction, we need to be able to conceive of the one thing apart from the\par
other, and vice versa. This one without anything related to the other one, that one without\par
anything related to the first one.\par
   - we need to have a "complete idea" of the one thing apart from the other\par
\par
What better way to show a real distinction???\par
\par
\ul Arnauld's big objection:\ulnone\par
Right triangle example: it's possible to have a clear/distinct idea of a right triangle w/o\par
any understanding of the fact that a\'b2+b\'b2 = c\'b2, and yet the two are in fact inseparable,\par
in fact it's impossible for a right triangle not to have that property.\par
   - So maybe if we had a more complete/adequate understanding of the mind, we would\par
     see that it is physical or it has physical properties that belong to its essence, etc.\par
   - You need to show that you/we have a complete enough idea of the mind to conclude\par
      that nothing physical belongs to its essence.\par
\par
\ul Descartes' reply:\ulnone\par
   - I/we do have a complete idea of the mind, not in the sense that we know everything\par
     there is to know about the mind (adequate idea), but in the sense that what we \i do\par
    \i0  know about it is enough to guarantee it can exist on its own as a substance.\par
  - Same for the body.\par
\par
\ul Elisabeth's big objection\ulnone :\par
How is it possible for the mind (no extension, no motion, no contact) to move the body?\par
\par
\par
\pard\sl240\slmult1\qc [\ul This material showed up on 29 Jan 2020 (the following class period)\ulnone ]\par
\pard\sl240\slmult1\par
\ul Arnauld's objection:\ulnone\par
\pard\li360\sl240\slmult1 Just because you can \b\i clearly conceive \b0\i0 of X without Y, that doesn't mean it's \b\i really possible \b0\i0 to have X without Y.\par
                                         [have a c/d idea]  \par
\cf1\fs4 .\cf0\fs36\par
   - I can have a \i c/d idea\i0  of a right triangle without having any idea of the Pyth. thm.,\par
     but that doesn't mean it's \i really possible\i0  to have a right triangle that doesn't obey the Pyth.\fs8  \fs36 thm.\par
\cf1\fs4 .\cf0\fs36\par
   - I can have a \i c/d idea\i0  of a mind without having any idea of anything physical,\par
     but that doesn't mean it's \i really possible \i0 to have a mind that has nothing physical to it.\par
\cf1\fs4 .\cf0\fs36\par
   - These days people worry about whether/when "conceivability entails possibility".\par
\pard\sl240\slmult1\cf1\fs30 .\cf0\fs36\par
\ul Descartes' response:\ulnone\par
\pard\li360\sl240\slmult1 Substance:\par
   - It's not just a matter of clearly conceiving of X without Y, it's also a matter of\par
     clearly conceiving of X \b\i as a complete thing\b0\i0  [i.e., as a substance] without Y.\par
\cf1\fs4 .\cf0\fs36\par
   - And also vice versa: clearly conceiving of Y as a complete thing without X.\par
\cf1\fs4 .\cf0\fs36\par
Active exclusion:\par
   - It's not just a matter of clearly conceiving of X \b\i without conceiving of Y\b0\i0 , it's also a matter of\par
      clearly conceiving of X \b\i while actively excluding Y\b0\i0 .\par
\cf1\fs4 .\cf0\fs36\par
   - Indeed, while excluding anything \b\i Y-related or Y-ish\b0\i0 .\par
\cf1\fs4 .\cf0\fs36\par
The inflated first premise:\par
  - I can have a c/d idea of the mind as a complete thinking thing/substance while actively\fs12  \fs36 excluding\par
    anything physical (And vice versa: I can have a c/d idea of the body as a complete extended\par
    thing/substance while actively excluding anything thought-related from it.)\par
\cf1\fs4 .\cf0\fs36\par
         My remark:\par
            - Now the first premise has been so inflated that it's not clear whether to accept it.\par
\cf1\fs4 .\cf0\fs36\par
            - I might be willing to sign on to a mere c/d idea of thinking going on without any idea of \par
              anything physical.\par
\cf1\fs4 .\cf0\fs36\par
            - But I'm not sure whether I have a c/d idea of a full-fledged thinking substance while \par
              actively excluding anything physical.\par
\pard\sl240\slmult1\par
\ul Elisabeth's objection:\par
\cf1\ulnone\fs4 .\cf0\fs36\par
\pard\li360\sl240\slmult1 How can a nonphysical mind move a physical body (and vice versa)?\par
\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li1080\sl240\slmult1 All movement seems to be a matter of impulsion, pushing, or surface characteristics.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}But a nonphysical mind cannot be in physical contact and has no extended surface.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}The only way to conceive of a nonphysical mind is as "a negation of matter which cannot \par
\pard\li360\sl240\slmult1           have any communication with [matter]".\par
\pard\sl240\slmult1\cf1\fs10 .\cf0\fs36\par
\pard\li360\sl240\slmult1 Maybe we should reject/modify dualism?\par
\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li1080\sl240\slmult1 It makes more sense to say the soul has some matter and extension.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Or maybe to say the soul has some unknown properties to it.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Or maybe to say that extension isn't completely contradictory to the soul, and has some\par
\pard\li360\sl240\slmult1           key role to play.\par
\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li1800\sl240\slmult1 After all, we know that physical illness can destroy the soul's ability to reason, so that\par
\pard\li1080\sl240\slmult1           the soul seems to be governed by the body.\par
\pard\sl240\slmult1\cf1\fs30 .\cf0\fs36\par
\ul Descartes' response:\ulnone\par
\cf1\fs4 .\cf0\fs36\par
\pard\li360\sl240\slmult1 We all understand mind-body union and interaction. These are known best via the senses.\par
\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li1080\sl240\slmult1 Three 'primitive notions' innate to our mind: \par
\pard\li360\sl240\slmult1                Mind (thought), Body (extension), Union (interaction).\par
\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li1080\sl240\slmult1 They cannot be explained in terms of anything else. So the way the soul moves the body\par
\pard\li360\sl240\slmult1           is different from the way one body moves another body.\par
\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li1080\sl240\slmult1 Our unscientific notion of \i heaviness \i0 results from taking our notion of mind-body interaction\par
\pard\li360\sl240\slmult1           (movement without contact) and misapplying it to merely physical interaction.\par
\pard\sl240\slmult1\cf1\fs10 .\cf0\fs36\par
\pard\li360\sl240\slmult1 Union and interaction are hard to conceive well when you meditate too much.\par
\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li1080\sl240\slmult1 They're known best via the senses, not the pure intellect.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}In "life and ordinary conversations", we learn to conceive this union.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}When you use the intellect to meditate on mind-body distinctness, it's hard to \i also \i0 conceive\par
\pard\li360\sl240\slmult1           of mind and body as unified into one single thing: it's "contradictory" [!]\par
\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li1080\sl240\slmult1 Go ahead and feel free to say the soul has matter and extension. That will help you\par
\pard\sl240\slmult1                get back to conceiving of mind-body union.\par
\par
\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\fs22\par
}
 