{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\colortbl ;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.21.2512;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\sl240\slmult1\lang9\f0\fs36 A philosophical rationale for epiphenomenalism:\par
   -  \ul Causal completeness of physics\ulnone : it looks like physics is highly successful, in that anytime you\par
       want to explain a \i physical \i0 event, you can always find a prior \i physical \i0 event that explains it\par
       (causes it) perfectly well.\par
\cf1\fs10 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  If this is correct, then \i non-physical\i0  entities/properties don't have any effect on the physical\par
      world. Dualism entails epiphenomenalism.\par
\cf1\fs10 .\cf0\fs36\par
           -  Unless you want to say that non-physical causes and physical causes just happen to \par
               always produce the same effect (\i overdetermination\i0 ), as if by massive worldwide coincidence.\par
\par
\par
\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\endash |\par
\ul\par
\pard\sl240\slmult1\qc Behaviorism\par
\pard\sl240\slmult1\par
Scientific/Psychological/Methodological behaviorism\par
\ulnone Pavlov, Watson, Skinner\par
Chomsky's 1959 review of \i Verbal Behavior\i0\par
cognitive revolution\ul\par
\par
Analytic/Philosophical behaviorism\par
\par
\ulnone Gilbert Ryle (1900\endash 1976): wanted to completely rethink the mind-body problem, advocated\par
                                                   something like behaviorism\ul\par
\par
"The dogma of the Ghost in the Machine"\ulnone  (aka "the official doctrine", "the official theory",\par
                                                                                    "the double-life theory"):\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  \i Human bodies\i0  are in space and time; \i minds \i0 are in time but not in space.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  \i Human bodies \i0 are subject to mechanical laws; \i minds \i0 are not.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  \i Human bodies\i0  are publicly observable; \i minds \i0 are only privately known.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  \i Human bodies \i0 are 'external'/'outer'; \i minds \i0 are 'internal'/'inner'.\par
          -  This is only metaphorical, although sometimes the metaphor is taken literally.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  It is mysterious how someone's mind and body influence each other.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  \i Human bodies\i0  have \i physical existence\i0 ; \i minds \i0 have \i mental existence\i0 .\par
          -  Two different kinds of existence.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  \i Human bodies \i0 are situated in a common (causal) field; \i mental happenings \i0 occur in insulated\par
       (causal) fields.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  \i Other minds \i0 I know only via uncertain inferences; \i my mind \i0 I know directly and with certainty.\par
          -  I am (virtually) always aware of my mind's conscious processes; I can also introspectively\par
             observe my mind.\par
          -  I cannot observe the minds of others. Perhaps I even have no good reason to believe other\par
             minds exist!\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  The mental concepts/terms we use (e.g., 'hope', 'amused', 'believing') are \i referential terms\i0 : they\par
       refer to "special episodes in [people's minds'] secret histories" (or at least "tendencies for such\par
       episodes to occur").\par
          -  But when we apply these concepts/terms to other people, we can never assure ourselves\par
             we're applying them correctly.\par
\par
Category-mistakes:\par
  -  Examples stemming from mere conceptual incompetence:\par
         -  "Where is the University?"\par
         -  "When is the division going to appear?"\par
         -  "Who contributes the team-spirit?"\par
  -  Examples where conceptually competent people go wrong in their abstract thinking:\par
         -  "What are the connections between the Church of England, the Home Office, and the British\par
              Constitution?"\par
         -  "Why can't the Average Taxpayer be a relative, friend, enemy, or stranger to me?"\par
\par
Origin of the category-mistake:\par
    -  Descartes couldn't accept the irreligious implications of mechanistic materialism.\par
           -  So the mind must involve non-mechanical processes.\par
           -  And other laws with a different type of causation.\par
           -  Just a different type of causal processes: "a para-mechanical hypothesis".\par
   -  Resulting problems:\par
           -  Mind-body interaction: the mind is understood merely negatively (not motion,\par
               not material, etc.)\par
           -  Free will: from rigid mechanical laws to rigid non-mechanical laws to not-quite-rigid\par
              non-mechanical laws.\par
   -  Underlying problem:\par
           -  The hypothesis he came up with undermined the very basis for the hypothesis.*\par
           -  He assumed that there must be some \i other \i0 causal process, some \i counterpart \i0 to mechanics.\par
           -  When terms belong to different categories, you can't assume they are fit for conjunction/\par
               disjunction (ands/ors).\par
                    -  I bought a left-hand glove, a right-hand glove, and a pair of gloves.\par
                    -  I came home in a flood of tears and a sedan-chair.\par
                    -  There exist both bodies and minds.\par
   -  Upshot:\par
           -  Materialism (reducing Mind to Matter) and Idealism (reducing Matter to Mind) are both\par
               mistaken: they both assume that Mind and Matter are of the same logical type.\par
           -  Saying that minds exist involves a different sense of 'exist' than saying that bodies exist.\par
           -  [Talk of the mind, mental processes, etc. is only a "logical construction" out of observable\par
               behavior.]\par
\par
Verificationism:\par
    -  In the early 20th century, logical positivists (influenced by modern logic, math, and physics)\par
        began arguing that any statement you can't scientifically test/verify is meaningless.\par
    -  For a claim like 'electrons are real' to be meaningful, there has to be a way of confirming or\par
        disconfirming it with observations. That's why wild metaphysics (e.g. "The Absolute enters into,\par
        but is itself incapable of, evolution and progress") is often meaningless.\par
    -  And a common \i verificationist theory of meaning \i0 is that the observations one uses to dis/confirm\par
        a statement \i just are \i0 the statement's meaning.\par
    -  What observations do we use to dis/confirm statements about a person's mind? Observations\par
        of that person's behavior!\par
\par
Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889\endash 1951): Austrian philosopher, ideal example of the deranged genius.\par
    -  \lquote the beetle in the box\rquote\par
    -  private language argument\par
\par
\par
Hilary Putnam (1926\endash 2016): bigshot Havard philosopher who changed his mind a lot.\par
\par
\ul Putnam's sci-fi critique of behaviorism:\par
\cf1\ulnone\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   \ul Extreme behaviorism\ulnone : all talk of 'mental events' is translatable into talk about overt behavior.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   \ul Weakened behaviorism\ulnone : (1) given the meanings of mental terms, certain statements about\par
   behavior do \i follow \i0 or are \i analytically entailed\i0 ;  (2) translation is only impossible due to superficial\par
   reasons involving differences in ambiguity and specificity.\par
\par
Disease analogy:\par
   -  \lquote pain\rquote  might be like \lquote polio\rquote  or \lquote multiple sclerosis\rquote\par
   -  The term's meaning involves a cluster of criteria, but none of those criteria are \i analytic\i0\fs16  \fs36 /\fs16  \i\fs36 necessary\i0 .\par
   -  The criteria are mere symptoms pointing to some internal cause. This cause is what matters.\par
   -  In a different world, polio might be present without any of those criteria (symptoms).\par
   -  Likewise, in a different world, pain might be present without any of the behavioral criteria.\par
\par
Super-Spartans and X-Worlders:\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  \i Super-spartans\i0  suppress all pain-behavior (except for verbal reports) for ideological reasons.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  \i X-worlders\i0  are super-super-spartans: they don't even give verbal reports of pain.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  These scenarios seem possible, and they show pain can exist without any overt behavior.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
          -  Behaviorists might say that these scenarios might contain a hidden absurdity.\par
                -  Perhaps they're not really possible after all.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
          -  But Putnam argues that we could scientifically confirm them, at least in principle:\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
                -  We could detect brain activity that is best explained as involving pain ('brain spikes'),\par
                    and even brain activity best explained as involving unspoken thoughts of pain ('V-waves').\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
                -  Or we could detect brain activity that \i disconfirms \i0 them ('W-waves').\par
 \par
\ul Peter Geach's objection to behaviorism:\ulnone\par
   -  A mental state can be associated with certain behavior \i only given other mental states\i0 .\par
   -  E.g.: \i S believes it's raining\i0  can be associated with \i Putting on galoshes, grabbing an umbrella, etc.\i0\par
         -  But only if S desires to stay dry. And only if S knows that galoshes and umbrellas keep you dry.\par
   -  So it's impossible to construct a single mental state out of behavior alone.\par
\par
\ul Ned Block's objections:\ulnone\par
    -  What about a perfect actor/pretender?\par
    -  What about a hollow puppet controlled by Martians?\par
\par
\par
\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\endash |\fs22\par
}
 