{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\colortbl ;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.21.2512;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\sl240\slmult1\lang9\f0\fs36 analytic vs. synthetic:  meaning/definitions\par
   analytic statements are true by definition (e.g., "All bachelors are unmarried"),\par
   synthetic statements are not\par
 \par
necessary vs. contingent:   possible or impossible, how things could have gone differently\par
   necessary statements must be true (impossible to be false; maybe "\u960? is irrational")\par
   contingent statements happen to be true or false (it's possible either way; maybe "my cat had kittens")\par
\par
\i a priori \i0 vs. \i a posteriori\i0 :   basis of knowledge in experience or pure reason\par
    a priori knowledge is not based on experience, but is pure rational knowledge (e.g. math)\par
    a posteriori knowledge is based on experience / observation (e.g., most sciences)\par
\par
\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\endash |\par
\par
                                                                   \ul Quick review of behaviorism\ulnone\par
\par
Hilary Putnam (1926\endash 2016): bigshot Havard philosopher who changed his mind a lot.\par
\par
\ul Putnam's sci-fi critique of behaviorism:\par
\cf1\ulnone\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   \ul Extreme behaviorism\ulnone : all talk of 'mental events' is translatable into talk about overt behavior.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   \ul Weakened behaviorism\ulnone : (1) given the meanings of mental terms, certain statements about\par
   behavior do \i follow \i0 or are \i analytically entailed\i0 ;  (2) translation is only impossible due to superficial\par
   reasons involving differences in ambiguity and specificity.\par
         -  Putnam argues that even weakened behaviorism is in trouble.\par
\par
Disease analogy:\par
   -  \lquote pain\rquote  might be like \lquote polio\rquote  or \lquote multiple sclerosis\rquote\par
   -  The term's meaning involves a cluster of criteria, but none of those criteria are \i analytic\i0\fs16  \fs36 /\fs16  \i\fs36 necessary\i0 .\par
   -  The criteria are mere symptoms pointing to some internal cause. This cause is what matters.\par
   -  In a different world, polio might be present without any of those criteria (symptoms).\par
   -  Likewise, in a different world, pain might be present without any of the behavioral criteria.\par
\par
Super-Spartans and X-Worlders:\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  \i Super-spartans\i0  suppress all pain-behavior (except for verbal reports) for ideological reasons.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  \i X-worlders\i0  are super-super-spartans: they don't even give verbal reports of pain.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  These scenarios seem possible, and they show pain can exist without any overt behavior.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
          -  Behaviorists might say that these scenarios might contain a hidden absurdity.\par
                -  Perhaps they're not really possible after all.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
          -  But Putnam argues that we could scientifically confirm them, at least in principle:\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
                -  We could detect brain activity that is best explained as involving pain ('brain spikes'),\par
                    and even brain activity best explained as involving unspoken thoughts of pain ('V-waves').\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
                -  Or we could detect brain activity that \i disconfirms \i0 them ('W-waves').\par
 \par
\ul Peter Geach's objection to behaviorism:\ulnone\par
   -  A mental state can be associated with certain behavior \i only given other mental states\i0 .\par
   -  E.g.: \i S believes it's raining\i0  can be associated with \i Putting on galoshes, grabbing an umbrella, etc.\i0\par
         -  But only if S desires to stay dry. And only if S knows that galoshes and umbrellas keep you dry.\par
   -  So it's impossible to construct a single mental state out of behavior alone.\par
\par
\ul Ned Block's objections:\ulnone\par
    -  What about a perfect actor/pretender?\par
    -  What about a hollow puppet controlled by Martians?\par
\par
\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\endash |\par
\par
                                                                              \ul Identity Theory\ulnone\par
\par
Behavioral (outputs)\par
Environmental (inputs)\par
Internal\par
\par
\ul Intentionality          Consciousness\par
\ulnone   intentional              phenomenal\par
(mental states       ("what it's like", raw feels, sensations)\par
that are \i about\i0                Early identity-theorists focus on this.\par
something else,\par
esp. propositions;\par
belief that \i p\i0 , hope\par
that \i\'acp\i0 , etc.)\par
\par
\ul Place, "Is Consciousness a Brain Process?"\ulnone\par
\par
Why people reject mind-brain identity theory:\par
\pard\li270\sl240\slmult1 1.  If two expressions are logically independent ('A' and 'B'), then what they refer to (A and B)\par
     must be ontologically independent.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
2.  Mental expressions and neurological expressions are logically independent.\par
\cf1\fs8 ..\cf0\fs36\par
3.  Therefore, the mental and the neurological must be ontologically independent.\par
           -  This is a rejection of mind-brain identity theory.\par
\pard\sl240\slmult1\par
Place agrees that Premise 2 is true. But he maintains that Premise 1 is not always true.\par
\par
'Is' of Definition  vs.  'Is' of Composition\par
    necessary                       contingent\par
     analytic                           synthetic\par
\par
Normal rule:  if two expressions are logically independent ('A' and 'B'), then\par
                           what they refer to (A and B) must be ontologically independent.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
                                -  The fact that the expressions are logically independent goes to show\par
                                    that we must \i not \i0 have found a necessary association between A and B.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
Exception:  when 'A' and 'B' have \i different operations for verifying\i0  the presence of what they refer to\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
                                -  e.g., \lquote cloud\rquote , \lquote mass of tiny particles...\rquote\par
                                -  The verification operations for the former are different from the verification\par
                                    operations for the latter.\par
                                -  But here they're not fundamentally different; they're continuous.\par
                                -  Example of fundamentally different?: \lquote lightning\rquote , \lquote electrical discharge...\rquote\par
                                -  Fundamentally different verification operations, logically independent          \par
                                    expressions, and yet what they refer to turn out to be identical with each other.\par
                                -  To prove identity, mere systematic correlation is not enough. The theory-based\par
                                    observations must explain the ordinary observations: e.g., the way electrical dis-\par
                                    charge... explains our ordinary observations of lightning.\par
\cf1\fs20 .\cf0         \fs36\par
Applying all this to the mind-body problem:\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
     -  Mental expressions (consciousness) and neurological expressions are logically independent.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
     -  But that doesn't necessarily mean that c'ness is ontologically independent from the brain.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
     -  It might be simply because the verification operations for the mental (consciousness) are\par
        fundamentally different from the verification operations for the neurological.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
     -  And perhaps a deeper theoretical understanding of the neurological can explain our ordinary\par
        observations of our own consciousness (\i introspective observations\i0 ).\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
     -  If so, we can say that consciousness is a brain process.\par
\cf1\fs20 .\cf0\fs36\par
\lquote Phenomenal Properties\rquote  Objection:\par
     -  The properties we observe in our consciousness (\i phenomenal properties\i0 ) are not the same as\par
         the properties in a physical brain!: e.g., greenness, spiciness.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
     -  Place's reply: We do not observe any phenomenal properties in our consciousness. We observe\par
         the properties of things in our environment, and we talk about our consciousness in terms of\par
         those external properties.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
     -  Not \ldblquote I'm having a greenish experience\rdblquote , but \ldblquote I'm having an experience like when I see something\par
         green in the external world.\rdblquote\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
     -  Place calls the assumption that we observe phenomenal properties "the phenomenological\par
         fallacy".\par
\par
\par
\ul Smart, "Sensations and Brain Processes":\ulnone\par
  -  Maybe Wittgenstein is right that mental language about e.g. pains and afterimages is not\par
     \i referential\i0 , but \i expressive\i0 . Maybe \ldblquote I'm in pain\rdblquote  isn't a genuine report, but a sophisticated wince.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
  -  But if it is a genuine report, that doesn't mean it refers to \ldblquote something irreducibly psychical\rdblquote .\par
      Maybe it refers to a brain process.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
  -  I'm not saying mental terms have the same \i meaning \i0 as neurological terms. I'm not saying you\par
     can \i translate\i0  mental statements into neurological statements. I'm not saying mental statements\par
     have 'the same logic' as neurological statements. All I'm saying is that maybe certain mental\par
     statements are genuine reports of brain processes, and that maybe sensations \i are \i0 (nothing over\par
     and above) brain processes.\par
           -  It's an ontological theory, not a semantic/conceptual/'logical' theory.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
  -  Obj. 1: "I can know and talk about pains and after-images without knowing anything about\par
     neurology!" I can know and talk about the Evening Star without knowing anything about the\par
     Morning Star (but both are Venus). I can know and talk about lightning without knowing anything\par
     about electricity (but that's all lightning is).\par
           -  Identity statements can be \i contingent\i0 . They can be scientific discoveries.\par
           -  [In effect, this is the masked man fallacy all over again.]\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
  -  Obj. 2: "These scientific theories are fallible and subject to revision!" Same goes for lightning, etc.\par
     All this shows is that \lquote sensation\rquote  and \lquote brain-process\rquote  don't mean the same thing.\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
  -  Obj. 3: "When two logically distinct expressions refer to the same thing, that's because they refer\par
      via different properties of that thing. For example, 'The Morning Star' refers via certain properties\par
      of Venus, and 'The Evening Star' refers via certain other properties of Venus. So neurological\par
      expressions would refer to brain processes via certain physical properties, and sensation\par
      expressions would refer to brain processes via certain \i phenomenal properties\i0 !"\par
           -  [This is the big tough objection. It's from Max Black.]\par
           -  Our sensation expressions don't refer to brain processes \i via phenomenal properties\i0 . They\par
               are 'topic-neutral'. In other words, when I say \ldblquote I see a yellowish-orange afterimage\rdblquote , I'm not\par
               making reference to any phenomenal properties. I'm only saying "There's something going\par
               on which is like what's going on when I see an orange, etc.".\par
           -  [We use certain environmental conditions that are normally associated with certain\par
               sensations to talk about our sensations. We don't have any insight into the properties of\par
               the sensations themselves, and must rest content with an open-ended 'something or other'.]\par
\cf1\fs8 .\cf0\fs36\par
   -  Finally: simple scientific method cannot decide between identity-theory and epiphenomenalism.\par
      We have to use more subtle forms of scientific method: e.g., principles of parsimony and\par
      simplicity (Occam's Razor).\par
           -  Analogy: how can we prove the Earth wasn't created 6000 years ago but designed to appear\par
              much much much older?\par
           -  Epiphenomenalist dualism involves too many inexplicable brute facts and irreducible\par
              psychophysical laws, with conscious experiences ending up as "nomological danglers".\par
\par
Both identity-theory papers defend an ontological theory about \i reality\i0 , not a 'logical' theory about\par
meaning/knowledge.\par
\par
Both face an objection based on our being introspectively aware of \lquote phenomenal properties\rquote  that\par
aren't easily applied to physical brains.\par
\par
\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\endash |\fs22\par
}
 